# String interpolation
String interpolation is one of the top ten requests on uservoice - http://visualstudio.uservoice.com/forums/121579-visual-studio/suggestions/2312991-string-interpolations-in-c

We've been discussing the feature back and forth in C# and VB language design meetings. This thread starts with a summary of the points raised from the Visual Basic Language Design Meeting of 2013-12-09, combined with comments from MVPs, but I'm hoping that everyone who's interested in the topic can add their thoughts and suggestions to the thread. (I switch back-and-forth between C# and VB syntax, which is how we did our discussions...)

So far the consensus seems to be a resounding "meh" because the proposed designs seem to miss the mark, and the feature isn't as important as other potential new features. Here's a writeup of all our notes so far, so we can have a wider discussion with the general public.

## Examples
Here are some examples in C# and VB:

``` cs
var x = "It measures \{distance:0.00}m";
```
``` vb
Dim filepath = $"{drive}:\{path}\{file}.{ext}"
Dim query = $"{url}?arg1={x}&arg2={y}"
Dim csv_line = $"{name},{dollars}{vbCrLf}"
```

String interpolation would be syntactic sugar for a call to String.Format:

``` cs
var x = "It measures \{distance:0.00}m";
==>
var x = String.Format("It measures {0:00}m ", distance);
```

## Motivation

Why string interpolation? Isn't String.Format already good enough? More generally, what is the real problem that string-interpolation tries to solve? Here are some possible answers, both good and bad. I think we haven’t yet got a crisp good answer to this question. Some possible answers:

1. It is a full replacement from String.Format, with culture and everything, to solve the mess that you find when there are too many positional arguments (see examples below)
2. It provides a quick-and-dirty way to do string concatenation in the invariant-culture for use in composing strings together to pass to other APIs
3. It provides an easy way to stick in identifiers
4. It is an easier way to teach Coding 101 – don’t want to start beginners on String.Format
5. All the other cool languages have it. (bad reason)


## Motive 1: a replacement for String.Format
Proposal: "String interpolation is a replacement for String.Format, for cases where the "positional" arguments {…} of String.Format are confusing to read." As a motivating example, the following code has a few bugs (missing space before {5}, and the orders have got mixed up) and it's not really human-readable…

``` vb
Dim x = String.Format("Robot {1} reporting{0}  {3} levels are {2}{0}" &
                      "{5} levels are {4}",
                      vbCrLf, name, coolant.name, coolant.level,
                      reactor.name, reactor.level)
```

Isn't normal string concatenation already good enough? Again, sometimes it's confusing. The bug here is that there's a missing vbCrLf at the end of the second line:

``` vb
Dim z = "Robot " & name & " reporting " & vbCrLf &
        "  " & coolant.name & "levels are " & coolant.value &
        "  " & reactor.name & " levels are " & reactor.value
```

One curious proposal is to allow string concatenation just by omitting the & in VB (or + in C#), just as is currently the case in C for string literals. But this seems pretty limited -- wouldn't allow for format specifiers, would only work for expressions with string literals before and after them, might close the language off to context-specific keywords in the future, and doesn't look very readable.


String interpolation could be neater and easier to debug than either String.Format or concatenation...
``` vb
    Dim y = $"Robot {name} reporting
{coolant.name} levels are {coolant.level}
{reactor.name} levels are {reactor.level}"
```

However, this example is fishy. Most professional programmers won't be writing user-facing strings in code. Instead they'll be storing those strings in resources (.resw, .resx or .xlf) for reasons of localization. So there doesn't seem much use for string interpolation here.


## Motive 2: a quick-and-dirty way to do construct strings for APIs.
``` vb
Dim filepath = $"{drive}:\{path}\{file}.{ext}"
Dim query = $"{url}?arg1={x}&arg2={y}"
Dim csv_line = $"{name},{dollars}{vbCrLf}"
```

These examples seem to work nicely with string interpolation, but we'd be opening up potential security holes when people construct strings without sanitizing them first. That's a worry.

Some open questions about string interpolation...

## Q. Default culture?
What should the default culture be for string interpolation?
* String.Format uses CultureInfo.CurrentCulture by default
* It feels like InvariantCulture would be a better bet if users are typically using string-interpolation as a way to construct strings to pass to APIs.
* CurrentCulture would be make more sense only if (1) people use it mainly for UI strings, (2) and they’re not localizing their UI by storing strings in .resw
* CurrentCulture also makes sense if the feature feels really close to String.Format.

## Q. Specify culture?
Should users be able to specify the culture to be used?
* The Javascript proposal (next post) would allow this, since you could call
``` vb
Dim s = FmtInvariantCulture`hello {x}`
Dim s = FmtCurrentCulture`hello {x}`
```
* If we want to use a prefix for string interpolation `var x = $"hello";`, then that provides a place where culture could be specified `var x = ${culture}"hello";`
* Alternatively, culture could be specified at the end, e.g.
``` cs
var x = "hello \{x}"(CultureInfo.CurrentCulture);
```
``` vb
Dim x = $"hello {x}"(CultureInfo.CurrentCulture)
```
* MVP Bill McCarthy suggested this interesting syntax:
``` vb
Dim x = $"hello {x}" Using CultureInfo.CurrentCulture
```

## Q. Perf of String.Format ?
What kind of compiler optimizations would be used?
* If the compiler sees that it can optimize away the call to String.Format, and use instead something more lightweight (that still has the same semantics), then it would:
``` cs
var x = "It measures \{distance}m";
==> var x = String.Format("It measures {0}m ", distance);
==> var x = String.Concat("It measures ", distance.ToString(), "m");
```
* Will there be compiler folding? e.g.
``` cs
var x = "hello \{a}" + "world \{b}";
==> var x = "hello \{a}world \{b}";
==> var x = String.Format("hello {0}world {1}", a, b);
```
* Will the compiler do compile-time evaluation if the arguments that go in the hole are constant and which don’t depend on the current culture? It seems risky to take a dependency on the internal behavior of String.Format…

## Q. Prefix syntax?
On an interpolated string, should it have a prefix?
``` cs
var x = "It measures \{d}m";
var x = $"It measures {d}m";
```
* For C# we were leaning towards the first form, where the presence of `\{.}` inside a string implies it is to be interpolated. For VB that's impossible, so we were pushed towards the second form where the prefix implies that the string will be interpolated.
* MVPs raised the issue that, if you wanted to do a global search to find all interpolated strings in a codebase, the prefix form makes it easier. If you merely searched for \{ then you'd get false-positives from double-escaped \\{, and from \{ in XML doc-comments.
* For choice of prefix, we considered the following, and preferred $
``` vb
Dim x = @"hello"   ' bad, since confusing with C# verbatim strings
Dim x = #"hello"   ' used in a few other languages
Dim x = $"hello"   ' used in Nemerle. Fits with the VB heritage
```

## Q. Hole syntax?
In an interpolated string, what syntax to use for marking an expression hole? And then how do you escape that syntax if you want to use it literally? For VB we considered the following:
``` vb
Dim brace  = $"hello {name} "" {{ {vbCrLf}"    ' PHP, Python, String.Format
Dim escape = $"hello \{name} \" \\ \n"         ' C# proposal
Dim hash   = $"hello #{name} "" ## ${vbCrLf}"  ' Ruby, Coffeescript
Dim $brace = $"hello ${name} "" $$ ${vbCrLf}"  ' Dart
Dim $paren = $"hello $(name) "" $$ $(vbCrLf)"  ' Nemerle
Dim $dollar= $"hello $name "" $$ $vbCrLf"      ' PHP, Perl, Dart, Nemerle
```
* `brace` is strongly reminiscent of String.Format, which is good. And {{ is how you already escape out of String.Format. The "vbCrLf" is reasonable way to get a newline. We preferred this option for VB.
* `escape` has the nice feature that it opens the door for escape characters, and is like C#. But it feels wrong to have to have that redundant extra character.
* `hash` doesn’t have much going for it.
* `$brace` re-uses $ in a reasonable way but the way to escape $ is pretty ugly
* `$paren` is a Nemerle variant of `$brace` with the same disadvantages
* `$dollar` would be a nice shortcut for the common case of just wanting to include an identifier, and is something allowed by string-interpolation in a lot of other languages. However it only combines well with `$brace` and `$paren`.


## Q. Expressions in holes?
What kinds of expressions should be allowed in the "holes"? Just identifiers? Or qualified identifiers? How about indexers? Invocations? Arbitrary expressions?
``` cs
var x = "This is \{arg[0]} and \{arg[1]}";
var y = "This is \{Lookup(x)} ";
var x = "Welcome \{user.Name} to \{user.Activity}";
```
* MVPs justifiably observed that it would be bad practice to use complex expressions inside the holes.
* But it's hard to draw a clear compiler-enforced line between "things that are okay in holes" and "things that aren't". For instance, indexers and method-invocations are probably good. So to keep things plain and regular, the compiler should probably to allow all expressions.
* There's a good precedent for this. With the async/await feature, we wanted to allow things like `var x = await t` and also `using (var x = await t)`. And so we allowed await in all expression contexts, even though it's bad practice to use them in confusing places like `x[await t1] += await t2;`
* In practical terms, it's very hard (in terms of implementing the lexer+parser) to allow arbitrary expressions inside a hole. VB already does this for expression holes in XML-literals, so could use the same codebase for expressions in interpolated-string-holes. But C# doesn't yet do this anywhere.
* Should it allow format-specifiers like the :0.00 used in the first example? That might complicate the lexing/parsing. But we don't see any ambiguity problems.


## Q. C# verbatim string?
Can you use string interpolation in a C# verbatim string?


## Q. VB implicit line continuations?
How does it work with VB implicit line continuations? e.g.
``` vb
Dim x = $"hello { 3
         + 4 } world"
```
Answer: it works exactly the same as always: implicit line continuations happen before or after specific characters. The fact of being inside a hole in an interpolated string doesn’t change that. So the above code won’t work, since implicit line continuation isn't allowed before +.

Also, { allows an implicit line-continuation after it as always, and } at the end of a hole allows an implicit line continuation before it as always. Note for precedent that `Dim x = New With { .x=15}` also allows an implicit LC after the `{`, and XML expression holes allow an implicit LC after the `<%=`.

## Q. VB Case statement?
Can you use interpolated strings as a VB Case expression? e.g. `Select Case x : Case $"hello {a}`
Answer: Yes. VB case statements always allow computed values here. C# never does.

## Q. Const?
Is an interpolated string const? `Const x as String = $"hello"`

Answer: No, never, not even for the ones that are clearly recognizable as constants. The rule is that string interpolation is semantically shorthand for String.Format (notwithstanding any under-the-hood compiler optimizations).

## The Python alternative
There's an idiom used in Python today, that some people in VB/C# are also adopting. Here's how it would look in .NET:

``` vb
Dim args = New With {.Name = "Jones", .Address = "1256 92nd St"}
Dim str = "Mr {Name} lives at {Address}".FormatEx(args)
```

The idea here is that it's all the positional format-arguments {0}, {1} in String.Format that are difficult to read. So we could do them using named arguments {Name}, {Address}. You would write an extension method on String which takes an object. At runtime your method parses the string to find curly braces (just like String.Format does), and it uses reflection to look for corresponding members in the "args" object.

(You'd have to be careful that the folks doing localization of your strings don't try to localize {Name} or {Address} !)

With the proposed "dictionary" features of C# and VB vNext, you could write FormatEx using dictionary arguments rather than reflection:
``` vb
Dim args = New Args With {!Name = "Jones", !Address = "1256 92nd St"}
Dim str = "Mr {Name} lives at {Address}".FormatEx(args)
```

This Python-style approach would also solve the culture problem -- because you can easily pass Culture to your extension method.

## The Javascript alternative
There's a string-interpolation proposal on the table for the next version of EcmaScript that's designed specifically to solve the security worries of string interpolation. It also solves Culture.
http://wiki.ecmascript.org/doku.php?id=harmony:quasis

It would look something like this if we translated it into .NET:
``` vb
Dim x = c.Fmt`Mr {name} at {address}`
==>
Dim x = c.Fmt({"Mr ", " at ", ""}, name, address)
```
The idea here is that at compile-time the interpolated string gets broken up into pieces, and then at runtime it gets passed as an argument to the specified function or delegate. The advantage, as compared to the Python approach, is that there's less runtime overhead.



We had discussed something sort-of-related for C#. "There are many different APIs which work the same way: let's come up with a proposal for string-interpolation which works with all of them". It would expand an interpolated string into a *comma-separate sequence of expressions* :
``` vb
$"hello {a} in {b}"
==>
"hello {0} in {1}", a, b
```

This would enable it to be used for a wide variety of APIs, e.g.
``` vb
1: Console.WriteLine($"hello {a} in {b}")
2: Dim x = String.Format($"hello {a} in {b}")
3: Diagnostics.WriteLine($"hello {a} in {b}")
```
However it would prevent another idiom,
``` vb
4: Dim x = $"hello {a} in {b}"
```

The pain of losing [4] is severe. And the other cases above all boil down to a call to String.Format, so we're not losing much by saying that string-interpolation is always translated into a call to String.Format. Indeed, we think that most of the time people take parameters `(fmt as string, ParamArray args as Object())`, then they just pass it down straight to String.Format. True there are just a few cases where they don't... for instance, the Roslyn codebase has a function where it modifies the format and args before passing them to String.Format. The pain of losing these scenarios seemed less than the pain of losing [4].

